---
layout: post
title: "CICO: Eating Less & Moving More"
date: 2017-04-17 18:00:00 +1200
comments: false
categories: [health]
---

What has happened in the past few months:

* I've lost 7-8kg or 15-17lbs and counting.
* I've maintained my strength for gym lifts.
* I comfortably ran 10KMs.
* I sleep better.
* Most importantly, my asthma is under control.

## Short Background

Due to different events in my life, I managed to gain an easy 5kg from around early-2015 to mid-2016. Even though I regularly lifted weights at the gym, this gain in weight did not translate to a gain in strength. What does that mean? The 5kg I gained was pure FAT. I still managed to maintain my lifts, but I personally felt the weight gained was utterly useless. I increasingly felt uncomfortable in my own body.

## My Body Through the Years

### Overweight Teenager

I was born a skinny baby but grew up to be a chubby, overweight kid. Until I was 16, I was usually overweight. I say usually because my weight would fluctuate depending on the seasons. During the summer I'd be able to partake in club tennis, club swimming and in the high school golf team. But during the cold and rainy winter seasons I'd be stuck indoors burried in books and computer games. It wasn't until I was 17-18 that I addressed the issue of food head-on and started to cut my food intake.

### First Taste of a Diet

Even though I had no idea about dieting, I managed to lose a cool 10kg, dropping from an all-time high of 90kg to a manageable 80kg. I achieved this purely by eating less, cutting my meal portions and eliminating snacks. Looking back, I realise that my somewhat active lifestyle (a lot of walking! and team sports) helped contribute to the weightloss. However, looking back I also now realise that at 80kg I was still a skinny-fat. I weighed less but my pant size was still a staggering 36inches.

### The Iron Gym

Once I entered university, I was introduced to the gym. I joined a few classmates and regularly lifted weights, albeit not too heavy. If I recall correctly, during this time my weight was around 81-83kgs. My lifts were nothing to be proud of, but I felt a change in my body - I was filling out my clothes without gaining weight, which meant I was gaining muscle and shedding fat. This was an utter revelation to me. I could eat more food, lift more, but maintain my weight.

### Nutrition and Starting Strength 

I instantly fell in love the gym - lifting weights and the cardio rooms. I was always aware of my own body and taught myself early on to follow strict and proper lifting techniques. I began to follow the starting strength powerlifting program. If I remember correctly, I followed this regime for 1-2 years around when I was 19-21 and managed to gain satisfactory lifts. Squat: 90kg, Benchpress: 70kg, Deadlift: 100kg. 
During this time I also began to educate myself on nutrition. I learned about Keto diets, the Paleo lifestyle and even dabbled in intermittent fasting. I wanted to find the optimal method to increase my strength while maintaing a healthy diet. However, in the back of my mind I was acutely aware of the restrictions these diets had on my life. I found that no matter how important it was for me to gain strength/maintain my body weight, I found myself constantly faltering.

Application of Strict Nutrition and Training Plans 
As I learned more about nutrition, I learned more about my own body. I could apply what I learned and could reap the benefits. From the age of 22-24 I took back the time that was owed to me. The time of enjoying the fitness of my body to the fullest, the time that was lost due to my overweight childhood. 
I took up road cycling and within a few months I joined the cycling club of my university. I managed to join the cycling team and partook in a 160km roadrace. I also lifted more seriously, following Candito's Linear Program I managed to record all-time highs for my lifts: Squat: 140kg, Benchpress: 90kg, Deadlift 180kg. The amount of cardio and strength training did have an impact on my body, but I managed to supplement the stress with a balanced diet.

When Scheduling is a Factor 
After reaching my personal lifting goals and cycling goals, I resigned to the fact that my body cannot keep up with the level of activity I wished. I was completely content with maintaing my lifts with a side of regular cardio, but most importantly all the while maintaing my weight of 80kg. As life progressed, I found it more difficult to set aside time for exercise. Withouth realising it, I was still eating as I had done before, as if I was on an intense lifting and cardio program. I was over-eating and under-exercising. This resulted in my weight ballooning to a near all-time high of 89/90kgs.
An Old Dog Learning New Tricks
Around mid-2016 I was hit with the realisation that I was in a downward spiral toward obesity. I was nearing my all-time high weight of 90kgs with no escape plan. I began to take action by retracing the very same steps I took 10+ years ago. The steps I took to lose weight, gain strength and maintain the weight.

The first thing I did was to count my calories. I knew that I was over-eating, but by how much? I spent a good 2-3 weeks logging my daily food intake. I had to relearn how many calories were in different types of food. Once calorie counting or CICO (calories in, calories out) clicked for me, I could start eye-balling foods and guestimating with relative accuracy. But it's very important to always revisit a food log or spend a day once every few weeks to log your food. This will ensure you are still aware of your food intake as it may change due to different events in your life. You may unconsciously over-eat to cope with certain unforeseen events.

The second and most important thing I did was to choose and stick to an exercise activity that I could continue for life. What does this mean? I wanted to ensure that this physical activity could still be done when I turned 60. Sure, I could try lift 180kgs or cycle 100+kms when I'm 60, but if I were to be realistic, none of those things will happen at that age (speaking for myself). So what did I choose? Running of course! It's a cheap and quick exercise activity to do, and most importantly the rate of energy expenditure of running compared to other sports is much higher. This means that with a busy schedule, I could still squeeze in at least 30-60mins of running a day and still be pushing my body physically. Bear in mind, I didn't just take up running and bolted off to do a 10km. It took me a good 1-2 years to build up the strength to run 10km continusouly. Sure you could do it quicker, but I'm aware of my own body's strengths and weaknesses and I didn't want to get hit with any potential injury. Remember, this is an activity to be done for life, there is no race against anybody else, it's a race against yourself. I'm happy to run consistently for a year at a slower pace rather than be running faster but being sidelined with an injury for months at a time.

## Closing

Why did I write this post? Is it a self-indulgent tool to show-off my achievements at finally controlling my bodyweight? Yes. But I feel that posts like this one are neccessary for those people who are still on their journey toward a healthier lifestyle. Maybe they can learn from my mistakes and also reflect on how their past shaped their current situation. It also serves as a reminder for those who may have unconsciously strayed toward the overweight or even obese mark. Life can sometimes give you curve-balls and it's easy to forget about your health when everything else is going wrong.

This post ended up being much longer than I thought it would be. I've only covered the physical aspects of gaining and losing weight, but I also experienced changes in my mental well-being as well. I found that I could sleep better and think clearer when I ate healthy and regularly exercised. Maybe I can write about that too in the future.